VAULT-21944: add documentation for thousands of namespaces (#24235)
hashicorp/vault: website/content/docs/enterprise/namespaces/namespace-limits.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: Running Vault Enterprise with many namespaces
description: >-

>   Guidance for using thousands of namespaces with Vault Enterprise

Author: Yup 😅

---

# Many namespaces

Namespaces can be used to create isolated environments within Vault Enterprise.
Vault has a default limit to the number of namespaces that can be created, but
the limit can be modified if needed. This page provides guidance of what to
expect when operating a Vault cluster with thousands of namespaces.

# Default limit

@include 'namespace-limits.mdx'

# Modifying the limit

@include 'storage-entry-size.mdx'

# Performance

Running Vault with thousands of namespaces can have operational impacts on a
cluster. Below are some performance considerations to take into account before
using thousands of namespaces.

It is **not** recommended to use thousands of namespaces with any version of Vault
lower than 1.13.9, 1.14.5, or 1.15.0. Improvements were released in those
versions which can improve the reliability of Raft heartbeats when using many

> namespaces.

Author: It looks like there's no diff between your suggestion and the original. Is there a change here that I should make?

All the data below was tested by creating a varying number of namespaces (using
only the default mounts) on a 3-node Vault cluster using integrated storage. The
cluster ran on Google Kubernetes Engine. These scenarios were tested using

> n2-standard-16 and n2-standard-32 nodes.

Reviewer: Do we want to specify that these are GCP related nomenclature, or specify that we tested these in GCP?

## Unseal time

Immediately after an unseal Vault will set up and initialize every mount, and

> Vault **may be unresponsive** while this initialization is happening. Each

Reviewer: Is it "may be" or "will be"?

namespace has at least the 4 default mounts (`sys`, `identity`, `cubbyhole`, and
`token`) that need to be set up.

Testing a varying number of namespaces, the following post-unseal times
were observed:

> | Number of namespaces | Post-unseal time  |

Reviewer: Do we want to define what a "Post-unseal" time is?

Author: Added

|----------------------|-------------------|
| 10                   | ~5 seconds        |
| 10000                | ~2-3 minutes      |
| 20000                | ~12-14 minutes    |
| 30000                | ~33-36 minutes    |

This period of unresponsiveness can occur even when Vault is using auto-unseal.

> ## Leadership transfers

Reviewer: Do we want to define what a leadership transfer is?

Author: Added

Leadership transfers take longer with more namespaces, and risk leaving the
cluster in a leaderless state for longer.

When testing a [`vault operator step-down`](/vault/docs/commands/operator/step-down)
command, the following times were observed:

| Number of namespaces | Time until a node is elected as leader |
|----------------------|----------------------------------------|
| 10                   | ~2 seconds                             |
| 10000                | ~33-45 seconds                         |
| 20000                | ~1-2 minutes                           |
| 30000                | ~4 minutes                             |

## Memory usage

Each namespace requires at least 435 kilobytes of memory to store information
about the paths available within the namespace. It is important to verify that
the machines running Vault have enough memory to support the number of
namespaces.

> ## Rollback and periodic functions

Reviewer: Do we want to define what a Rollback is?

Author: Added

Once every minute, Vault will perform a rollback operation on every mount. By
default, Vault will use 256 workers to perform these rollback operations. If
some mounts take too long to complete the rollback operation, then the rollbacks
can become backed up. The effects of this will vary based on the particular
mounts that are being used. It may mean that stale data takes longer to be
cleaned up, or that periodic rotations happen less frequently than intended.

> Backups in rollback operations can be detected by monitoring the
> [`vault.rollback.queued`](/vault/docs/internals/telemetry/metrics/core-system#rollback-metrics),
> and [`vault.rollback.waiting`](/vault/docs/internals/telemetry/metrics/core-system#rollback-metrics)
> metrics. If the number of queued items stays larger than 256, or if the waiting
> period is longer than 60 seconds, then the number of rollback workers isn't able
> to keep up.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can tell whether the number of rollback workers is sufficient by monitoring
the following metrics:

Expected range | Metric
-------------- | ------
0 – 256        | [`vault.rollback.queued`](/vault/docs/internals/telemetry/metrics/core-system#rollback-metrics)
0 – 60         | [`vault.rollback.waiting`](/vault/docs/internals/telemetry/metrics/core-system#rollback-metrics)
```

Style correction: write in active voice, make key information easy to see at a glance

> ## Identity secret engine

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Identity secret engine warnings
```

> When using many namespaces, it is common to see warning level log lines from the
> root namespace's `identity` secret mount:
> 
> ```text
> 2023-10-24T15:47:56.594Z [WARN]  secrets.identity.identity_51eb2411: error expiring OIDC public keys: err="context deadline exceeded"
> 2023-10-24T15:47:56.594Z [WARN]  secrets.identity.identity_51eb2411: error rotating OIDC keys: err="context deadline exceeded"
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
When using OIDC with many namespaces, you may see warnings in your Vault logs
from the `identity` secret mount under the `root` namespace. For example:

```text
2023-10-24T15:47:56.594Z [WARN]  secrets.identity.identity_51eb2411: error expiring OIDC public keys: err="context deadline exceeded"
2023-10-24T15:47:56.594Z [WARN]  secrets.identity.identity_51eb2411: error rotating OIDC keys: err="context deadline exceeded"
```
````

Style correction: write in active voice

> These errors occur because the root namespace is responsible for rotating the
> [OIDC keys](/vault/docs/secrets/identity/oidc-provider) of all other namespaces.
> It is not recommended to use thousands of namespaces if you are intending to use
> Vault as an [OIDC provider](/vault/docs/concepts/oidc-provider), as rotations and
> invalidations of OIDC keys can be delayed.

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
The `secrets.identity` warnings occur because the root namespace is responsible
for rotating the [OIDC keys](/vault/docs/secrets/identity/oidc-provider) of all
other namespaces.

<Warning title="Avoid OIDC with many namespaces">

  Using Vault as an [OIDC provider](/vault/docs/concepts/oidc-provider) with
  many namespaces can severly delay the rotation and invalidation of OIDC keys.

</Warning>
````

Style correction: write in active voice, make critical information easy to see at a glance
